feat: [PIPE-15905]: Doc update for Update empty field behavior in inputset form to match with run pipeline form (#6940)
harness/developer-hub: docs/platform/pipelines/input-data-preprocessing.md

This happens because, in the Harness system, when saving the input set with an empty value for an input variable or running the pipeline with an input set having an empty string value of an input variable, it gets encoded as `<+input>`.

:::info note
`<+input>` is treated as null in Harness
:::

## Solution

As a user, you might want more control over how empty values are handled, especially if you want the string to stay empty. Harness provides an option called **Save Blank Fields as Empty String** for this purpose.

With this option enabled, an empty string `""` remains unchanged throughout the pipeline execution. This keeps the YAML and Visual view consistent with the final payload sent during execution.

Let's first see how to enable this feature and then in later section let's discuss the behavior change we see after enabling this feature.

## How to enable this feature?

:::info note
Currently this feature is behind feature flag, `CDS_ENABLE_RAW_MODE`. Contact [Harness Support](mailto:support@harness.io) to enable the feature.
:::

Enable the following settings at account level to use this feature:

> - **Show checkbox to Save Blank Fields as Empty String**: When enabled, this setting shows the checkbox **Save Blank Fields as Empty String** both when creating the input set and in the Pipeline Run form.

Author: added the info will merge after build is completed

---
title: Input Data Pre-processing for Pipeline

> description: You can use YAML to create pipelines in Harness.

Reviewer: This needs to be updated.

---

As a user, you can control the pre-processing of input data, allowing you to manage how empty values are handled in the background. In the normal case, when you provide an empty value `""` as your input, it will be converted into `<+input>` in the background.

Let's take an example where you are running a pipeline via an input set:-

We have provided value of variable **var_config** as empty string.
```yaml
inputSet:
  name: input
  tags: {}
  identifier: input
  orgIdentifier: default
  projectIdentifier: Samples
  pipeline:
    identifier: test_expression
    variables:
      - name: var_config
        type: String
        value: ""
```

> Now, when we run the pipeline and check the compiled yaml after the execution it would have taken it as `<+input>`.

Reviewer: No, it won't do that. If the value is saved as "", it will pass as "" only, even now. The problem is not to do with saved input sets/values when passed to the pipeline directly, or through API.

The problem is when you provide no value to an input in the Input Set **in the UI**. The UI will save it as <+input>. Since the value has been saved as <+input> (by the UI), it will get sent to the Pipeline as <+input>. So we need to stop the UI from changing the "" into <+input>.

![](./static/compiled_yaml_processing.png)

> As a user, you might want more control over how these empty values are handled, especially in cases where you want the string to remain empty. This is where the **Raw Mode** feature comes into play.

Reviewer: It isn't called Raw Mode in the UI or documentation, It's called Input Pre-processing. Please confirm with @Eric761 on the exact text (and we can discuss if needed).

> With Raw Mode enabled, the empty string `""` remains as-is throughout the pipeline execution process. This ensures that the YAML and the visual view are consistent with the final payload sent during execution.

Reviewer: The Raw Mode stops the conversion **only when saving the "" through UI**. Everything else already used to work.

For instance, if you want **var_config** to remain an empty string, enabling Raw Mode will prevent it from being converted to `<+input>`.

This ensures that the input remains exactly as specified, providing you with precise control over your pipeline configurations.

## How to enable this feature?

:::info note
Currently this feature is behind feature flag `CDS_ENABLE_RAW_MODE`. Contact [Harness Support](mailto:support@harness.io) to enable the feature.
:::

You need to enable following settings at account level to use this feature:

1. Display Raw Mode Setting

> 2. Default value of Raw Mode 

Reviewer: This needs some more explanation. 

The display Raw Mode setting adds a checkbox to three places: Run Form, Input Set create/edit form, and the Input Set creation popup in the trigger creation flow. 

The "Default value of Raw Mode" option is to say whether this check box is ticked by default or not.

![](./static/raw_mode_setting_account.png)

## Detailed Behavior Changes

### If Raw mode of Off (Current Behavior)

- **Initial Load** : `<+input>` is shown as `""`
- **Run Pipeline with Input Set**: `""` is converted into `<+input>` in the payload.
- **Run Pipeline without Input Set**: No transformation; `""` is not converted to `<+input>` in the payload.
- **Input Set Details Page**: `""` is converted to `<+input>` upon saving
- **Triggers Page when creating an Input Set**: `""` is converted to `<+input>` upon saving the input Set.

### If Raw mode in On

- **Creating and Updating Input Sets**:

>    - **Initial Load**: No transformation, values are as it is.

Reviewer: Creation has a different behaviour from Updating Input Sets, please check the confluence page

---
title: Input Data Pre-processing for Pipeline
description: You can control the pre-processing of input data
---

> As a user, you can control the pre-processing of input data, allowing you to manage how empty values are handled in the background. In the normal case, when you provide an empty value `""` as your input, it will be converted into `<+input>` in the background.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
As a user, you can control the pre-processing of input data, allowing you to manage how empty values are handled in the background. Typically, when you provide an empty value `""` as your input, it is converted to `<+input>` in the background.
```

> Let's take an example where you are running a pipeline via an input set:-

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Here's an example where you are running a pipeline via an input set. Here, we have not provided any input value.
```

> In this example, we have not provided any value to the input:-

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion

```

```yaml
inputSet:
  name: input
  tags: {}
  identifier: input
  orgIdentifier: default
  projectIdentifier: Samples
  pipeline:
    identifier: test_expression
    variables:
      - name: var_config
        type: String
        value: ""
```

> Now, when we run the pipeline and check the compiled yaml after the execution it would have taken it as `<+input>`.

Reviewer: This can also be seen when the Run form is submitted. I'm saying this because the *pipeline* is not doing the preprocessing - it is the Run Form. The Pipeline is just taking the <+input> values as they are given.

> Now, when we run the pipeline and check the compiled yaml after the execution it would have taken it as `<+input>`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When you run the pipeline and check the compiled yaml after the execution, you can see that the value is taken as `<+input>`.
```

> If you have saved your Input Set in Git and if you check the yaml saved in Git, it will would have taken the value of the variable as `<+input>`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If you have saved your Input Set in Git, when you check the YAML, you can see that the value of the variable is `<+input>`.
```

![](./static/compiled_yaml_processing.png)

> As a user, you might want more control over how these empty values are handled, especially in cases where you want the string to remain empty. To handle this behavior Harness provides an optio **Save Blank Fields as Empty String**.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
As a user, you might want more control over how these empty values are handled, especially in cases where you want the string to remain empty. To handle this behavior, Harness provides the **Save Blank Fields as Empty String** option.
```

> With this option checked, the empty string `""` remains as-is throughout the pipeline execution process. This ensures that the YAML and the visual view are consistent with the final payload sent during execution.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Enable this option to keep the empty string `""` as is throughout the pipeline execution process. This ensures that the YAML and the Visual view are consistent with the final payload sent during the execution.
```

For instance, if you want **var_config** to remain an empty string, enabling Raw Mode will prevent it from being converted to `<+input>`.

This ensures that the input remains exactly as specified, providing you with precise control over your pipeline configurations.

## How to enable this feature?

:::info note
Currently this feature is behind feature flag `CDS_ENABLE_RAW_MODE`. Contact [Harness Support](mailto:support@harness.io) to enable the feature.
:::

> You need to enable following settings at account level to use this feature:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Enable following settings at account level to use this feature:
```

> 1. **Show checkbox to Save Blank Fields as Empty String** - This setting, when enabled, will show the checkbox **Save Blank Fields as Empty String** both while creating the Input Set and during Pipeline runform.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- **Show checkbox to Save Blank Fields as Empty String**: This setting, when enabled, will show the checkbox **Save Blank Fields as Empty String** both while creating the Input Set and during Pipeline Run form.
```

> 2. **Default value of Blank Fields as Empty String** - When enabled, this setting will automatically select the checkbox **Save Blank Fields as Empty String** by default.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- **Default value of Blank Fields as Empty String**: When enabled, this setting will automatically select the **Save Blank Fields as Empty String** checkbox.
```

![](./static/blank_field_as_empty_account_setting.png)

## Detailed Behavior Changes

### If Save Blank Fields as Empty String is not enabled (Current Behavior)

- **Creating Input Sets**:
   - **Initial Load**: On load `<+input>` is converted into `""`.

>    - **Saving**: On Save, `""` is converted into`<+input>`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   - **Saving**: On Save, `""` is converted to`<+input>`.
```

- **Updating Input Sets**:

>   - **Initial Load**: On Load, `<+input>` is converted into `""`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  - **Initial Load**: On Load, `<+input>` is converted to `""`.
```

>   - **Saving**: On Save, `""` is converted into `<+input>`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  - **Saving**: On Save, `""` is converted to `<+input>`.
```

- **Run Pipeline form with Input Set**:

>   - **Initial Load**: On Load, `<+input>` is converted into `""`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  - **Initial Load**: On Load, `<+input>` is converted to `""`.
```

  - **Execution**: On Run, `""` stays `<+input>`.

- **Run Pipeline without Input Set**:
  - **Initial Load**: On Load, `<+input>` is changed to `""`.
  - **Execution**: `""` stays `""`.

### If Save Blank Fields as Empty String is enabled

- **Creating Input Sets**:

>    - **Initial Load**: On load `<+input>` is converted into `""`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   - **Initial Load**: On load `<+input>` is converted to `""`
```

---

> title: Input Data Pre-processing for Pipeline

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
title: Pre-processing input data for pipelines
```

description: You can control the pre-processing of input data
---

> In a few cases, when you provide an empty value `""` as your input, it will be converted into `<+input>` in the background. This behavior specifically occurs in two scenarios:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When you provide an empty value `""` as your input, it is converted to `<+input>` in the background in the following scenarios:
```

> 1. When an Input Set is used to run a pipeline from the UI.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. When an input set is used to run a pipeline from the UI.
```

> 2. When an Input Set is used in a Trigger to start a Pipeline.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
2. When an Input Set is used in a trigger to start a pipeline.
```

:::info
`<+input>` is interpreted as null by Harness.
::: 

Here's an example where you are running a pipeline via an input set. Here, we have not provided any input value.

> In this example, we have not provided any value to the input:-

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion

```

Reviewer 2: removing this line as it is already covered in the previous line.

```yaml
inputSet:
  name: input
  tags: {}
  identifier: input
  orgIdentifier: default
  projectIdentifier: Samples
  pipeline:
    identifier: test_expression
    variables:
      - name: var_config
        type: String
        value: ""
```

> When you run the pipeline, the Run Form processes the input values. If no value is provided, it shows `<+input>`, indicating that the pipeline is ready to accept values as they are given. The pipeline itself doesn't preprocess these values; it takes whatever is provided by the Run Form directly.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When you run the pipeline, the Run Form processes the input values. If no value is provided, it shows `<+input>`, indicating that the pipeline is ready to accept values as they are given. The pipeline itself doesn't pre-process these values. It takes whatever is provided by the Run Form directly.
```

![](./static/compiled_yaml_processing.png)

As a user, you might want more control over how empty values are handled, especially if you want the string to stay empty. Harness provides an option called **Save Blank Fields as Empty String** for this purpose.

> With this option enabled, an empty string `""` remains unchanged throughout the pipeline execution. This keeps the YAML and visual view consistent with the final payload sent during execution.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
With this option enabled, an empty string `""` remains unchanged throughout the pipeline execution. This keeps the YAML and Visual view consistent with the final payload sent during execution.
```

> For example, if you want **var_config** to stay an empty string, enabling this option will prevent it from being converted to `<+input>`.This ensures your input remains exactly as you specified, giving you precise control over your pipeline configurations.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For example, if you want **var_config** to stay an empty string, enabling this option will prevent it from being converted to `<+input>`. This ensures that your input remains exactly as you specified, giving you precise control over your pipeline configurations.
```

## How to enable this feature?

:::info note

> Currently this feature is behind feature flag `CDS_ENABLE_RAW_MODE`. Contact [Harness Support](mailto:support@harness.io) to enable the feature.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Currently this feature is behind feature flag, `CDS_ENABLE_RAW_MODE`. Contact [Harness Support](mailto:support@harness.io) to enable the feature.
```

:::

> Enable following settings at account level to use this feature:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Enable the following settings at account level to use this feature:
```

> - **Show checkbox to Save Blank Fields as Empty String**: This setting, when enabled, will show the checkbox **Save Blank Fields as Empty String** both while creating the Input Set and during Pipeline Run form.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- **Show checkbox to Save Blank Fields as Empty String**: When enabled, this setting shows the checkbox **Save Blank Fields as Empty String** both when creating the input set and in the Pipeline Run form.
```
